# Lock Granularity

## Table locks

The most basic locking strategy available in MySQL, and the one with the lowest overhead, is table locks.  
A table lock is analogous to the spreadsheet locks described earlier: it locks the entire table.  
When a client wishes to write to a table (insert, delete, update, etc.), it acquires a write lock.  
This keeps all other read and write operations at bay. When nobody is writing, readers can obtain read locks, which don’t conflict with other read locks.
Table locks have variations for improved performance in specific situations.  
For example, `READ LOCAL` table locks allow some types of concurrent write operations.  
Write and read lock queues are separate with the write queue being wholly of higher priority than the read queue.

## Row locks

The locking style that offers the greatest concurrency (and carries the greatest overhead) is the use of row locks.  
Going back to the spreadsheet analogy, row locks would be the same as locking just the row in the spreadsheet.  
This strategy allows multiple people to edit different rows concurrently without blocking one another.  
This enables the server to take more concurrent writes, but the cost is more overhead in having to keep track of who has each row lock,  
how long they have been open, and what kind of row locks they are as well as cleaning up locks when they are no longer needed.
Row locks are implemented in the storage engine, not the server.  
The server is mostly unaware of locks implemented in the storage engines, and as you’ll see later in this chapter and throughout the book,  
the storage engines all implement locking in their own ways.

# Isolation Levels

Isolation is more complex than it looks. The ANSI SQL standard defines four isolation levels.

## READ UNCOMMITTED

In the READ UNCOMMITTED isolation level, transactions can view the results of uncommitted transactions.  
At this level, many problems can occur unless you really, really know what you are doing and have a good reason for doing it.  
This level is rarely used in practice because its performance isn’t much better than the other levels,  
which have many advantages. Reading uncommitted data is also known as a dirty read.

## READ COMMITTED

The default isolation level for most database systems (but not MySQL!) is READ COMMITTED.  
It satisfies the simple definition of isolation used earlier:  
a transaction will continue to see changes made by transactions that were committed after it began,  
and its changes won’t be visible to others until it has committed.  
This level still allows what’s known as a nonrepeatable read. This means you can run the same statement twice and see different data.

## REPEATABLE READ

REPEATABLE READ solves the problems that READ UNCOMMITTED allows.  
It guarantees that any rows a transaction reads will “look the same” in subsequent reads within the same transaction,  
but in theory it still allows another tricky problem: phantom reads.  
Simply put, a phantom read can happen when you select some range of rows, another transaction inserts a new row into the range,  
and then you select the same range again; you will then see the new “phantom” row.  
InnoDB and XtraDB solve the phantom read problem with multiversion concurrency control, which we explain later in this chapter.

`REPEATABLE READ` is MySQL’s default transaction isolation level.

## SERIALIZABLE

The highest level of isolation, SERIALIZABLE, solves the phantom read problem by forcing transactions to be ordered so that they can’t possibly conflict.  
In a nutshell, SERIALIZABLE places a lock on every row it reads. At this level, a lot of timeouts and lock contention can occur.  
We’ve rarely seen people use this isolation level, but your application’s needs might force you to accept the decreased concurrency in favor of the data safety that results.

# Transactions in MySQL

## Understanding AUTOCOMMIT

By default, a single `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, or `DELETE` statement is implicitly wrapped in a transaction and committed immediately.  
This is known as AUTOCOMMIT mode. By disabling this mode, you can execute a series of statements within a transaction and, at conclusion, `COMMIT` or `ROLLBACK`.

---

You can enable or disable the AUTOCOMMIT variable for the current connection by using a `SET` command. The values 1 and `ON` are equivalent, as are 0 and `OFF`.  
When you run with `AUTOCOMMIT=0`, you are always in a transaction until you issue a COMMIT or ROLLBACK.  
MySQL then starts a new transaction immediately. Additionally, with AUTOCOMMIT enabled, you can begin a multistatement transaction by using the keyword `BEGIN` or `START TRANSACTION`.  
Changing the value of AUTOCOMMIT has no effect on nontransactional tables, which have no notion of committing or rolling back changes.
