# Proactive Monitoring

## Disk growth

If your monitoring tooling can allow it, tracking the rate of growth of disk space usage can be remarkably useful.  
There are always scenarios where available disk space can burn down relatively quickly, putting your availability at risk.  
Operations like long-running transactions with large undo logs or alter tables are examples of why you might approach full disk too fast.  
There are many incident stories out there where excessive logging or a change in insert pattern for a given data set went undetected until “the database” ran out of disk space.  
Only then did all sorts of alerts fire.

---

If tracking the rate of growth is not feasible (not all monitoring tools provide this ability),  
you can set multiple thresholds with lower warnings that only fire during business hours and a higher,  
more critical value as an alert to off-hours on call.  
This allows the team to have a heads-up warning during business hours before things get dire enough to wake someone up.

## Connection growth

While your traffic is growing, the database server can support a finite pool of connections,  
which is configured as the server setting max_connections.  
Monitoring connection growth is about making sure your resources are not exhausted to the point of risking your database availability.  
This risk can come in two different ways:

- The application layer is opening lots of connections it’s not using and creating the risk of maxing out connections for no good reason.  
  A clear sign of this is seeing connections count (`threads_connected`) as high but `threads_running` is still low.

- The application layer is actively using lots of connections and risking overloading the database.  
  You can distinguish this state by seeing that both `threads_connected` and `threads_running` are  
  at high values (hundreds? thousands?) and increasing.

---

A useful thing to consider when setting up monitoring for connection count is relying on percentages and not absolute numbers.  
A percentage of `threads_connected/max_connections` shows you how close the growth of your application node count is taking you to the maximum connection pool the database can allow.  
This helps you monitor for the first state of connection growth trouble.  
Separately, you should be tracking and alerting on how busy a database host is, which, as we explained earlier, is seen in the value of `threads_running`.  
Typically, if this value is growing north of one hundred threads, you start to see elevated CPU usage and increased memory use, which is a general sign of high load on the database host.  
This is an immediate concern for your database availability, as it can escalate to the MySQL process getting killed by the operating system.  
A common quick solution is to use the kill process command or a tool that automates using it,  
such as pt-kill, tactically to relieve load, then look into why the database got into this state using query analysis, which we described earlier.

## Auto-increment space

One of the less well-known landmines in using MySQL is that auto-increment primary keys are by default created as signed integers and can run out of key space.  
This happens when you have done enough inserts that the auto-increment key has reached the maximum possible value for its data type.  
When planning what metrics you should monitor on a long-term basis, monitoring remaining integer space for any tables that use auto increments as the primary key  
is a simple action that will almost certainly save you some major incident pain in the future because you can predict the need for a larger key space in advance.

---

How do you monitor this key space? You have a few options. If you already use PMM and its Prometheus exporter,  
this comes baked in and all you need to do is turn on the flag `-collect.auto_increment.columns`.  
If your team does not use Prometheus, you can use the following query.  
This query relies on `information_schema`, which has all the metadata about the tables in your database instance:

```sql
SELECT
    t.TABLE_SCHEMA AS `schema`,
    t.TABLE_NAME AS `table`,
    t.AUTO_INCREMENT AS `auto_increment`,
    c.DATA_TYPE AS `pk_type`,
    (
        t.AUTO_INCREMENT /
        (CASE DATA_TYPE
            WHEN 'tinyint'
                THEN IF(COLUMN_TYPE LIKE '%unsigned',
                    255,
                    127
                )
            WHEN 'smallint'
                THEN IF(COLUMN_TYPE LIKE '%unsigned',
                    65535,
                    32767
                )
            WHEN 'mediumint'
                THEN IF(COLUMN_TYPE LIKE '%unsigned',
                    16777215,
                    8388607
                )
            WHEN 'int'
                THEN IF(COLUMN_TYPE LIKE '%unsigned',
                    4294967295,
                    2147483647
                )
            WHEN 'bigint'
                THEN IF(COLUMN_TYPE LIKE '%unsigned',
                    18446744073709551615,
                    9223372036854775807
                )
        END / 100)
    ) AS `max_value`
    FROM information_schema.TABLES t
    INNER JOIN information_schema.COLUMNS c
        ON t.TABLE_SCHEMA = c.TABLE_SCHEMA
        AND t.TABLE_NAME = c.TABLE_NAME
    WHERE
        t.AUTO_INCREMENT IS NOT NULL
        AND c.COLUMN_KEY = 'PRI'
        AND c.DATA_TYPE LIKE '%int'
;
```
